Introduction

Over the years India has emerged as one of the leading nations in scientific research and the biggest achievements have been in the field of space science, nuclear science, communication, medical science and in the agricultural sector. Today, India is surging ahead in the fields of biotechnology specifically in plant and agriculture as well as in medical research as far as stem-cell and cancer research is concerned. Also Nano-technology is the major emerging field. Over the years the Government has made a major surge in investments in these sectors and has also facilitated the establishment of several research institutions in the nation, from the Council of Scientific and Industrial (CSIR) research to Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), BARC, DRDO, ISRO and many more. These institutions have worked as temples of knowledge and wisdom and have acted as a major catalyst in the growth of scientific research in India since the Independence in 1947. 

After over 70 years since independence it is time to do a critical analysis of science and scientific research in the country using SWOT Analysis (Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats). Although it is not a quantitative study, it is quite beneficial to get a rought understanding of where India as a nation sits in the Global Scenario of Scientific Research. 

Strengths

Largest number of qualified scientific manpower.

Availability of topmost expertise in many research areas.

Infrastructure facilities built to desired levels.

Vast scope for encouraging young scientists to pursue research in advanced fields.

Funds fairly adequate both from Government and private sectors.

Large number of scientific academies, councils, societies, etc.

High-quality library  facilities with modern communication technologies.

Publication of a large number of scientific journals.

Commendable achievements,  laurels, recognition.

Weaknesses

Under-utilized scientific manpower.

Imbalance in research priorities.

Inadequate facilities in some institutes and poor linkages.

Lack of incentives an incentives  and  rewards to back-up excellence

Low priority for standard of research output

Scientific journals of poor quality.

Lack of awareness on quality and original research

Lack of awareness on quality research journals and impact factor analysis citation index/frequency, etc.


Opportunities

Scope for Scope for  reorganizing scientific manpower

Reorientation of research priorities on a national basis.

Providing opportunities for achieving excellence

Promotion of team spirit with scientific temper and encourage collaborative research.

Accelerating inter or multidisciplinary research.

According incentives/rewards for quality work.

Counselling on quality of publications

Establishment of advanced centres for acquiring latest knowledge and encouraging exchange with other centres.

Promotion of Advocacy in the Scientific community

Threats

Exodus of brilliant brains to other countries or "Brain Drain"

Personality clashes Personality clashes affecting progress in research

Enhanced level of mediocrity i.e. mediocre research becomes a norm.

Imporper use/ misuse of enormous funds

Lack of scientific accountability/responsibility


References -

Rajagopal, V. (2008). SWOT analysis on Indian scientific research. Current science, 94(7), 846-847.

Figure 2 - https://scroll.in/article/777202/science-research-in-india-is-flourishing-despite-funding-cuts-and-indifference-says-new-study

Figure 3 - https://scroll.in/article/727743/india-research-report-doctorates-innovation-hrd-shortage

